
                                                                   Price
                                                                     50¢




                         The Civil War Battles
                                   of
                              Chickamauga
                                  and
                              Chattanooga


         New York Peace Monument, Point Park, Lookout Mountain

                            By J. L. ROGERS

                             THIRD EDITION




                         THE CIVIL WAR BATTLES
                                   of
                              CHICKAMAUGA
                                  and
                              CHATTANOOGA


The Front Cover:

The New York Central Memorial, or Peace Monument, Point Park, Lookout
Mountain, Tennessee. This is the largest and most imposing monumental
structure in the park. The height is 95 feet. The base is 50 feet in
diameter. The platform is reached by 7 steps which are made of Tennessee
marble. There is a colonnade 3 steps above the platform. In the center
of the colonnade is a pedestal on which rests the tall circular shaft.
The shaft is surmounted by bronze figures of a Union and Confederate
soldier with “Old Glory” towering above them. “Their hands once raised
in strife, now clasping a brother’s hand.” These bronze figures are 8′
9″ high and were designed by R. Hinton Perry of New York, to whom the
idea was suggested by General Daniel E. Sickles. The pink granite in
this monument came from Milford, Mass. The contractor for the granite
work was G. H. Cutting Granite Co., of Worcester, Mass. The plans and
specifications for the monument were prepared by A. J. Zabriskie,
Engineer and Secretary of the New York Monument Commission. This
monument was erected in 1907 at a cost of approximately $80,000.00. It
was dedicated on November 15, 1910, with impressive ceremonies, the
dedication alone costing $21,138.58. In his address on that occasion
General Sickles said of this monument:

“I take a great deal of pride in that monument. It was designed by my
colleagues and myself and my secretary, A. J. Zabriskie. I myself
designed a great deal of the statuary which surmounts it. It represents
conciliation; and that was my thought—my thought of a Northern and
Southern soldier standing under one flag, which they both hold as they
embrace each other. That is the spirit in which we have done our
monumental work in Chattanooga, in placing there an enduring monument to
reconciliation and peace. New York holds out her hand to Tennessee. New
York embraces Tennessee and all her sister states in the South. New York
offers to all of them good fellowship, good will and reconciliation now
and forever.”


                             Copyright 1942
                            By J. L. ROGERS
                           3203 Dayton Blvd.
                           Chattanooga, Tenn.




                                CONTENTS


  CHICKAMAUGA AND CHATTANOOGA NATIONAL MILITARY PARK
  CHATTANOOGA AND ITS IMPORTANCE DURING THE CIVIL WAR
  THE CAMPAIGN AND BATTLE OF CHICKAMAUGA
  THE SIEGE AND BATTLE OF CHATTANOOGA
  REGIMENTAL LOSSES—HERE AND ELSEWHERE
  CIVIL WAR PRISONS
  DID YOU KNOW THAT
  HISTORIC SITES IN CHATTANOOGA
  COMPLETE INDEX OF UNION AND CONFEDERATE ORGANIZATIONS AT CHICKAMAUGA,
          CHATTANOOGA, OR BOTH




                                PREFACE


_The following pages have been written after a careful study of the
Official records and other Civil War library books to which I have had
access over a period of years, and not upon the recollection of personal
experience, as I did not belong to the generation which fought the great
Civil War. It has been my desire to make all statements as accurate as
possible, and sincerely believe that any and all statements contained in
this volume can be verified by the Official Records. I wish to express
my thanks to the War Department, under whose authority the Official
Records were published. I also wish to express my thanks to the late
Hon. Charles W. Lusk of Chattanooga, Tennessee, for his valuable
suggestions._

    [Illustration: Entrance to Point Park. Lookout Mountain]

    [Illustration: Riderless Horse—Chickamauga Battlefield]




           CHICKAMAUGA AND CHATTANOOGA NATIONAL MILITARY PARK
                        (Georgia and Tennessee)


By an act of Congress, approved August 19, 1890, the Chickamauga and
Chattanooga National Military Park was established, with a view to
preserving and suitably marking those battlefields for historical and
professional military study. The part undertaken by the Government in
the establishment of this park embraced the purchase of lands,
restoration of the fields, construction of roads and trails, building of
observation towers, the erection of appropriate monuments to the regular
troops engaged there, the preparation of hundreds of historical tablets
for the various organizations of the contending armies, the mounting of
original guns in their exact positions during the battles and the
erection of shell pyramids, both of square-base and triangular-base
type.

The park was created as a result of the reunion of the Army of the
Cumberland which was held in Chattanooga, Tennessee, on September 19-20,
1889. At this reunion, the Chickamauga Memorial Association was formed.
Gen. John T. Wilder was elected president and Gen. Joseph Wheeler
vice-president. Then a Board of Directors, numbering 28, were elected.
Of this number, an equal division was made of ex-Union and
ex-Confederate officers.

Since that time the various states having troops in the battles have
erected hundreds of beautiful, expensive monuments and markers which
show the exact regimental positions of their troops. The tablets mark
the brigade and division positions and give a brief history of their
activities. The blue tablets mark the Union positions, while the red
tablets mark Confederate positions. Another interesting thing to know is
that all of these tablets have been placed in such a manner that when
you are facing them, you are facing the same direction which the troops
were facing at that time and place. Therefore, if anyone cares to follow
up the movements of any particular organization, it can be done very
easily.

Every effort has been made to restore the battlefields to their original
condition. Speaking of the shell pyramids, there are 14 of the
square-base type which mark the headquarters sites of either an army
corps or the field headquarters of the commanding general. There are 8
of the triangular-base pyramids which mark the exact spot where each of
the brigade commanders lost their lives. All of these are located on the
Chickamauga battlefield. On Missionary Ridge, a bronze cannon-ball
monument has been substituted for a pyramid. This also marks the site
where a brigade commander lost his life. One original house stands on
the Chickamauga battlefield; also three replicas of the original.

This is the largest and oldest of the National Military Parks. It is
probably the first one on which the high-ranking officers of the
contending armies ever met to determine their exact locations during the
battles. The park consists of approximately 8,584 acres, and embraces
the battlefields of Chickamauga, Orchard Knob, Lookout Mountain and
Missionary Ridge, all of which were very important in military
operations around Chattanooga, Tennessee, in the fall of 1863. The
Chickamauga battlefield alone covers 5,562 acres.




          CHATTANOOGA AND ITS IMPORTANCE DURING THE CIVIL WAR


In 1863 Chattanooga was a very small town with a population of only
4,000. Notwithstanding the small population, it was the objective of
both the Union and Confederate armies. Its importance was chiefly due to
the railroads that intersected here. There were rail connections to the
Mississippi River at Memphis; to the Ohio River via Nashville and
Louisville; to the Atlantic at Savannah and Charleston via Atlanta, and
to Richmond via Knoxville and Lynchburg. In addition to this,
Chattanooga was located on the Tennessee River. Therefore, with every
transportation facility possible, its possession was of vital
importance. Union troops in possession of Chattanooga, meant a wedge
through the Confederacy, because Chattanooga was the “key” to east
Tennessee and northwest Georgia. Furthermore, it would discourage the
forwarding of supplies and the transportation of troops back and forth
from Richmond to the areas in west Tennessee and Mississippi. The
section of east Tennessee in which Chattanooga is located is one of the
most fertile sections in the entire South for the production of grain.
Not only wheat, corn and hay, but plenty of beef, bacon, horses and
mules. All of these were of vital importance in the support of an army.
In fact, both Governments profited from the resources of this area.

Another reason for Chattanooga’s importance was a political reason. All
of the mountainous region of east Tennessee in which Chattanooga is
located was exceptionally sympathetic with the Union. President Lincoln
and his military advisers regarded the possession of Chattanooga by the
Union army as second only in importance to the capture of Richmond—the
Confederate capital. It was by far the most important city in Tennessee
to place Union forces since it would encourage the Unionist sentiment
and relieve the loyal citizens from Confederate control.

Eventually two major battles were fought for possession of Chattanooga.
First, the battle of Chickamauga on September 19-20, which was a
Confederate victory. Two months later the battle of Chattanooga was
fought. This was a three-day battle. At Orchard Knob, Nov. 23rd; Lookout
Mountain, Nov. 24th; Missionary Ridge, Nov. 25th. This was a very
decisive victory for the Union army.

NOTE: In reading of the battles, please remember that any name used
applies strictly to their commands unless otherwise explained.


          THE FIRST OCCUPATION OF CHATTANOOGA BY CONFEDERATES

At the outbreak of the Civil War, there were no Confederate soldiers in
Chattanooga. They made their appearance in the spring of 1862—a year
after the war started. These troops were commanded by Generals Floyd,
Maxey and Leadbetter. It was only a short time until Union forces,
commanded by General Mitchell, arrived. They shelled the city on June
7th and 8th, and the Confederates made a hasty exit. In August, General
Braxton Bragg, commanding the Confederate army, invaded Chattanooga and
started a campaign into Kentucky. After an unsuccessful campaign in
Kentucky, Bragg was forced to fall back to Murfreesboro, Tennessee. At
this time the Union army was at Nashville, Tennessee. On December 31,
1862, and January 1-2, 1863, the battle of Stones River, or
Murfreesboro, was fought. This was a fierce battle which resulted in a
Union victory. The victory enabled the Union army to spend the remainder
of the winter in Murfreesboro, while the Confederates retreated
southeastward to Tullahoma, Tennessee. At this time the Army of the
Cumberland (Union) was commanded by Major-General William S. Rosecrans.
The Army of Tennessee (Confederate) was commanded by General Braxton
Bragg whom Fort Bragg, one of our most modern army posts, is named in
honor of. Both armies were making preparations for future battles which
they realized were forthcoming once winter was over. The Confederates
posted a strong line of cavalry on the north side of the Duck river.
Their infantry positions were strongly fortified. The winter months were
long and severe, and you may be sure that both armies endured many
hardships. The Union plans called for Rosecrans to take Chattanooga and
Atlanta, both important railroad centers, during 1863. In fact,
Chattanooga was an important railroad center as early as 1850. Both
armies were rather idle for several months although Rosecrans was being
urged to renew hostilities against Bragg.


                         THE TULLAHOMA CAMPAIGN

Finally, on June 23, 1863, Rosecrans left Murfreesboro, moving against
Bragg at Tullahoma. By exercising very clever strategy in the form of a
series of flanking movements, the Confederates were forced to give up
one stronghold after another. The Confederates finally crossed the
Tennessee River at Bridgeport and Caperton’s Ferry, Alabama, and moved
directly into Chattanooga. The first arrival at Chattanooga was at the
same hour that General Pickett made his famous charge at Gettysburg,
namely near high noon on July 3rd. By this time the Union army had
advanced to the western base of the Cumberland Mountain. The right of
their line was at Winchester; the left at McMinnville. Rosecrans, with
his headquarters at Winchester, was making preparations for another
campaign for occupying Chattanooga. At this time Chattanooga was of
utmost importance to both armies, and no doubt the largest prize from a
military standpoint which the Army of the Cumberland ever contended for.
The Confederates had destroyed the bridge across the Tennessee River at
Bridgeport to delay the pursuit of the Union Army. The Union army
consisted of three regular Army Corps; the 14th, commanded by Maj.-Gen.
George H. Thomas; the 20th, commanded by Maj.-Gen. Alexander McCook, and
the 21st, commanded by Maj.-Gen. Thomas L. Crittenden. The Cavalry Corps
was commanded by Brig.-Gen. Robert Mitchell; the Reserve Corps was
commanded by Maj.-Gen. Gordon Granger. The disposition of the Union
forces was as follows:

Thomas was posted at Decherd; McCook at McMinnville, and Crittenden at
Winchester. Again Rosecrans was urged to renew hostilities against
Bragg. The Cumberland, Raccoon and Lookout Mountain ranges and the
Tennessee River were some of the giant obstacles between Rosecrans and
Chattanooga. To cross these required a maximum of time and supplies as
it was quite a task. There were railroads to repair; the river bridge to
be rebuilt. All of this required time and labor. It was humanly
impossible for Rosecrans to begin a forward movement at this time. By
extending every effort possible, it was July 25th before the railroads
were repaired. Another weighty consideration of Rosecrans was the
necessary forage for the animals. Having knowledge that corn would not
be ripe in east Tennessee and northern Alabama before the middle of
August, Rosecrans insisted on waiting until that time before he launched
another campaign. Officials of the War Department were eager for action
on the part of Rosecrans.

On August 4th, Gen. Halleck sent a message to Rosecrans which said:
“Your forces must move forward without delay. You will daily report the
movement of each corps till you cross the Tennessee River.” Since
Rosecrans was not ready for the movement, he replied: “Your dispatch
ordering me to move forward without delay, reporting the movements of
each corps till I cross the Tennessee River received. As I have
determined to cross the river as soon as practicable, and have been
making all preparations and getting such information as may enable me to
do so without being driven back, like Hooker, I wish to know if your
order is intended to take away my discretion as to the time and manner
of moving my troops.” To this message Gen. Halleck replied: “The orders
for the advance of your army, and that it be reported daily are
peremptory.” This latter message did not set well with Rosecrans. He
prepared his reply and after conferring with his corps commanders and
receiving their assurance that they would support him, he sent the
following message: Gen. Halleck: “My arrangements for beginning a
continuous movement will be completed and the execution begun Monday
next. We have information to show that crossing the Tennessee River
between Bridgeport and Chattanooga is impracticable, but not enough to
show whether we had better cross above Chattanooga and strike Cleveland,
or below Bridgeport and strike in their rear. The preliminary movement
of troops for the two cases are quite different. It is necessary to have
our means of crossing the river completed and our supplies provided to
cross 60 miles of mountains and sustain ourselves during the operations
of crossing and fighting, before we move. To obey your order literally
would be to push our troops into the mountains on narrow and difficult
roads, destitute of pasture and forage; and short of water where they
would not be able to maneuver as exigencies demand, and would certainly
cause ultimate delay and probable disaster. If, therefore, the movement
which I propose can not be regarded as obedience to your order, I
respectfully request a modification of it or to be relieved from the
command.”

  Gen. Halleck wired him as follows: “I have communicated to you the
  wishes of the Government in plain and unequivocal terms. The objective
  has been stated, and you have been directed to lose no time in
  reaching it. The means you are to employ and the roads you are to
  follow are left to your own discretion. If you wish to promptly carry
  out the wishes of the Government you will not stop to discuss mere
  details. In such matters I do not interfere.”

  Rosecrans replied the same day. His message read: “Your dispatch
  received. I can only repeat the assurance given before the issuance of
  the order. This army shall move with all dispatch compatible with the
  successful execution of our work. We are pressing everything to bring
  up forage for our animals. The present rolling stock of the road will
  barely suffice to keep us day by day here, but I have bought 50 more
  freight cars, which are arriving. Will advise you daily.” There was no
  further interference from Washington.

    [Illustration: Park Headquarters, Chickamauga Battlefield]

    [Illustration: Snodgrass House, Chickamauga Battlefield]




                      THE CAMPAIGN FOR CHATTANOOGA


On August 16th, the Union army started their forward movement. Thomas
and McCook moved their corps down to the Tennessee River at Bridgeport.
Crittenden moved down the Sequatchie Valley, having troops from just
north of Jasper to a point above Pikeville. A part of the latter’s
corps, (Wilder’s and Wagner’s Mounted Infantry) took positions along
Walden’s Ridge and Signal Mountain where they were in plain view of the
Confederates in Chattanooga. Numerous demonstrations were made at these
points to attract the attention of the Confederates and to make them
believe they were attempting to cross the river at some point above the
city. They would beat on empty barrels to imitate the rolling of supply
wagons. They also built huge bon-fires and would march back and forth in
the flare of them. Buglers were placed at distant points where they
would strike a few notes at regular intervals. They even sawed planks,
boards and pieces of logs to float down the river to give the
Confederates the impression they were building a pontoon bridge at some
point above the city. On August 21st, a part of Wilder’s brigade
advanced to Stringer’s Ridge where they shelled Chattanooga with
artillery. One shell landed in front of the First Presbyterian Church at
Seventh and Market streets, while services were being conducted. Some
reports claim that a little girl had her leg broken by a piece of shell.
However, according to the report of Confederate Gen. D. H. Hill, several
women and children were killed. Today, Chattanooga’s tallest building,
the Hamilton National Bank, stands on this site. The shelling of the
city showed that the Union troops were on the immediate front of the
Confederates. As a result, Cleburne’s division was sent to Harrison, and
then distributed at every ford and ferry between the mouths of the
Chickamauga Creek and the Hiwasee River—a distance of at least 50 miles.
These troops were so placed in order to guard against any possible
crossing by the Union troops. All of these positions were covered by
rifle-pits and batteries. With the Confederates’ attention drawn in this
direction, the main body of the Union army effected a crossing of the
river at Bridgeport, 30 miles below Chattanooga, between August 29th and
September 4th, unmolested. Thomas crossed over the Sand Mountain to
Trenton, Georgia, after much difficulty.

When Bragg learned that the Union army had crossed the river below him
he evacuated Chattanooga during the 8th and 9th of September, moving 26
miles southward to LaFayette, Georgia, behind the Pigeon Mountains. This
movement was made in order that he could protect his line of
communications and his base of supplies, his base being Atlanta. As the
last of Bragg’s army was leaving the city on the morning of September
9th, the 92nd Illinois Mounted Infantry made a reconnaissance on Lookout
Mountain. They then entered the city. Crittenden’s corps followed the
railroad to Ringgold, then westward to Rock Springs in pursuit of the
Confederates. At this latter point, Crittenden was directly between
Bragg and Chattanooga.


                         PRELIMINARY MOVEMENTS

Rosecrans was led to believe that Bragg was in full retreat to Rome and
Atlanta. He had gathered this information from pretended deserters from
the Confederate army. However, he was determined to head the
Confederates off. He immediately dispatched Thomas and McCook down
Lookout Valley to point 26 and 42 miles below Chattanooga where they
crossed Lookout Mountain. Thomas moved into McLemore’s Cove; McCook to
Alpine and Summerville, Georgia. In planning these movements and making
such disposition of his troops, Rosecrans was falling into a trap which
had been set for him. Bragg’s army was not in retreat. They had no
intentions of retreating. Rosecrans was not aware of the fact that Bragg
was not in retreat until about September 12th. His army was divided into
three sections. It was at least 60 miles from the left to right of his
troops. Meanwhile, Bragg at LaFayette, was opposite the Union center and
in position to attack and crush the Union army in detail as they emerged
from the mountains. He had already been re-enforced by Buckner from east
Tennessee and Walker from Mississippi. He was only awaiting Longstreet’s
arrival from Virginia before turning back in an effort to retake
Chattanooga. The latter named troops were seasoned veterans who were
sent down by Gen. Lee. A great many of them had fought in the battle of
Gettysburg. Upon their arrival Bragg ordered the Confederates to turn
back toward Chattanooga. His plan was to attack Crittenden and in case
Thomas and McCook should arrive they could be taken care of, likewise,
in order. Failure of his subordinate officers to comply promptly with
these orders caused this opportunity to be lost. Rosecrans, upon
learning that Bragg had received heavy re-enforcements and was turning
back in an effort to retake Chattanooga, hurriedly ordered the
concentration of his forces. McCook, contrary to orders, took a
roundabout route from Summerville, causing some delay. However, on
September 17th, he joined Thomas and they in turn started their movement
to join Crittenden. At this time Crittenden was on the west side of
Chickamauga Creek at Lee and Gordon’s Mill. It was necessary for Thomas
and McCook to make a forced march day and night in order to reach
Crittenden. They were practically exhausted when they reached him.


                        BRAGG’S PLAN FOR BATTLE

On September 17th, Bragg had ordered his troops to cross the Chickamauga
Creek at Reed’s and Alexander’s bridges. They were to sweep up the creek
toward Crittenden’s position. His objective was to gain possession of
the main road between Rosecrans and Chattanooga. Incidentally, this main
road is known today as Highway U. S. No. 27. The Confederates reached
Chickamauga Creek on Friday afternoon, September 18th. Here they met
with some opposition from the Union troops. After a great deal of
skirmishing, of which some was rather severe, the Confederates effected
a crossing.


                       THE BATTLE OF CHICKAMAUGA

On Saturday morning the right of the Confederate line extended to the
Reed’s Bridge road. Forrest’s Cavalry Corps was posted on the right of
this line. Thomas’ troops arrived on the LaFayette road at the Kelley
field near daylight on Saturday morning, the 19th. Brannan’s division
moved up the main road to the McDonald field, thence east toward Reed’s
bridge. When in the vicinity of Jay’s Mill they encountered Forrest’s
cavalry. Croxton’s brigade fired into them and thus opened the battle of
Chickamauga. Forrest’s men dismounted and returned the fire, fighting as
infantry. It was now 7:30 A. M. The battle was slow to start. Then it
became severe. Both sides sent for re-enforcements which were sent at
once. Connell’s and VanDerveer’s brigades came to Croxton’s support
while Walker and Liddell brought their divisions to Forrest’s
assistance. Due to the Confederates not being in the positions which
Bragg had ordered them, a great deal of confusion resulted. However,
troops kept filling in on both sides until the lines were about three
miles in length. Each side gained and lost ground many times by severe
charging and counter-charging. Baird made an effort to reform his lines
but while doing so, was attacked by Walker in greater numbers. King and
Scribner were driven back some distance at the same time. The Union
forces then drove Walker to his former position. At this time Cheatham
came to Walker’s rescue and they drove Johnson, Palmer and VanCleve back
in order. Reynolds was then overpowered by the Confederates, the rebels
yelling wildly all the while. Davis and Wood then checked the advance of
the Confederates. After adjusting their lines, they drove Cheatham,
Walker and Stewart back to their former positions. Most of the fighting
was in the woods at this time although some was in open fields. Much of
it was at very close range. In just such manner the fighting lasted all
the forenoon, neither side gaining very much. Casualties were high on
both sides. It is believed that the 10th and 74th Indiana Infantry were
the most severely engaged at this time. It may be interesting to learn
that Col. William B. Carroll, commanding the 10th Indiana Infantry, was
the first field officer to be killed at Chickamauga. By noon the
fighting was general throughout the lines.

During the afternoon the most severe fighting took place near the
opposite ends of the lines in the Vineyard field. Fighting at this point
was all at close range and some was hand-to-hand. About 4:00 P. M., Col.
Hans C. Heg, 15th Wisconsin Infantry, was mortally wounded. Col. Heg
commanded the 3rd brigade of Davis’ division. With death staring him in
the face, he again rallied his men and rode nearly one-quarter of a mile
before the loss of blood weakened him to such an extent that he was
forced to give up his command. His brigade was taken over by Col. John
A. Martin of the 8th Kansas Infantry. Col. Heg was the first brigade
commander to fall on the Chickamauga battlefield. After a restless night
in a hospital, he passed away near noon of the 20th. After sundown the
fighting ceased at all portions of the field. Neither side had gained
any worthwhile advantage during this first day of battle, although the
Union forces had been driven much closer to the main road. The left of
the Union line under Thomas was well anchored across the main highway;
the center under McCook was just west of the highway, and the right end
of the line under Crittenden was still east of the highway. The
Confederate line was very close to the Union line at all points. Shortly
after dark the battle was renewed near the north end of the lines.
Cleburne and Cheatham encountered Johnson and Baird. The fighting lasted
only about an hour but the losses were heavy. Two brigade commanders
lost their lives about 7:00 P. M. On the Union side, Col. Philemon P.
Baldwin of Indiana, was killed. Col. Baldwin commanded the 3rd brigade
of Johnson’s division. Col. William W. Berry of the 5th Kentucky
Infantry, assumed command of Baldwin’s brigade. On the Confederate side,
Brig.-Gen. Preston Smith of Tennessee was killed. Gen. Smith commanded a
brigade of Cheatham’s division. Col. Alfred J. Vaughn, Jr., 13th
Tennessee Infantry, assumed command of Smith’s brigade. During the night
both armies rearranged their lines in preparation for the next day’s
battle. The right end of the Union line was shifted from the vicinity of
the Vineyard field westward to the Crawfish Springs road near Widow
Glenn’s. The Confederate line remained east of the highway at all
points, slightly over-lapping the Union line on either end. The troops
on the left of the Union line fortified their positions during the night
by falling trees, stacking rails, stumps, etc., in preparation for
Sunday’s battle. On the Confederate side Longstreet, the South
Carolinian, arrived with his corps about 11:00 P. M. At this time Bragg
divided his army into two wings, the left and right. Longstreet was
given command of the left wing; Gen. Leonidas Polk, the North
Carolinian, who was the first Protestant Episcopal Bishop of Louisiana,
was placed in command of the right wing. Bragg gave order for the battle
to be resumed at daylight on Sunday morning. His plan was to launch the
Confederate right against the Union left, with each division and brigade
to their left to take up the firing in order until the battle became
general throughout the field. Hill’s corps was on the right of the
Confederate line. Breckinridge commanded the extreme right division. The
latter had three brigades, commanded by Helm, Adams and Stovall.

Sunday morning came. The battle was not resumed at daylight. Sunrise
came, but still no battle. Bragg was waiting impatiently, listening and
wondering. His orders were not being carried out, even in part. Finally,
becoming nervous, he went in search of Polk, Hill and Breckinridge. He
was determined to find the cause for delay. It seems that everyone but
the right one had received their orders. Hill claimed he had no
knowledge of Bragg’s plan, although his division commanders had received
their orders. Some of the Confederates had not had their breakfast,
although it was considerably past the breakfast hour. None of the troops
were in position for battle as had been ordered. This necessitated a
great deal of rearrangement in the lines. It is a known fact that Hill
did not approve of Polk being in a higher command than himself. Hill
insisted that he was senior to Polk in his rank. Possibly this caused
the delay in resuming the battle. About 9:00 o’clock, the Confederate
right was thrown forward against the Union left. The logworks were too
strong for the Confederates. Time and again they charged, to be driven
back with severe losses. This fighting was at very close range. Helm’s
brigade was almost shattered, and while engaged in this desperate
struggle, the commander, Brig.-Gen. Ben Hardin Helm of Kentucky was
mortally wounded. Helm was a brother-in-law of President Lincoln’s wife.
However, fragments of his brigade, in addition to Adams and Stovall,
gained the left and rear of the Union left and entered the Kelley field.
Later they were repulsed. Gradually the battle rolled from right to left
along the Confederate line. Longstreet, near the Confederate center, was
opposite the Brotherton house. About 11:15 A. M., a gap was created in
the Union center when Wood’s division, through the misunderstanding of
an order issued by Rosecrans, withdrew from the line and marched to the
left and rear of Brannan.

    [Illustration: View from Point Lookout overlooking Moccasin Bend
    with Chattanooga in background.]

    [Illustration: The famous Umbrella Rock, Lookout Mountain]

Longstreet, with eight brigades, forced their way through, throwing the
right and right center of the Union line back in confusion. Rosecrans,
McCook and Crittenden left the field. A great many of the troops under
the latter named two left the field. Some few of them later rallied and
remained on the field during the afternoon. Gen. Thomas, then being the
senior officer on the field, immediately assumed command. Holding a
pivot with the extreme left of his line, the right end moved back until
it reached Snodgrass hill. This gave him an almost impregnable position.
With this newly formed east-west line he could check the advance of the
Confederates and also cover Rosecrans’ retreat. The Confederates, upon
crossing the road, changed front with their artillery. Their infantry
swept around like a large gate on hinges. By almost continuous
advancing, the Confederates reached the south side of Snodgrass hill
where they established their line. Within less than an hour from the
time of the break in the Union line, three other brigade commanders lost
their lives. Near the Confederate right, Col. Peyton H. Colquitt, 46th
Georgia Infantry, was mortally wounded about noon. Colquitt commanded
Gist’s brigade of Walker’s division. Lt.-Col. Leroy Napier assumed
command of Colquitt’s brigade. A short distance to the south, Brig.-Gen.
James Deshler of Texas was killed about the same time. Deshler commanded
a brigade in Cleburne’s division. His command was taken over by Col.
Roger Q. Mills. Farther to the southwest in the Union line, Brig.-Gen.
William H. Lytle, the Cincinnati soldier-poet, was killed while trying
to rally his brigade against the Confederate sweep to the north. Lytle
commanded the 1st brigade of Sheridan’s division. His command was taken
over by Col. Silas Miller of the 36th Illinois Infantry.


                         THE PEAK OF THE BATTLE

By 2:00 P. M. the battle was raging on Snodgrass hill. This fighting was
at very close range and a great deal was hand-to-hand struggling. The
Confederates kept charging up the slopes, making every effort to drive
the Union troops from their position. They were never able to carry the
hill. A few of the Confederates passed over the hill to the right of the
Union line. They moved to the rear of Brannan and entered the valley
beyond his position. About 3.00 P. M., when the fighting reached its
peak, Longstreet sent to Bragg for re-enforcements from the right wing.
However, he never received them. On the contrary, he was told by Bragg
that the troops of the right wing had been beaten back so badly that
they would be of no service to him. There were Confederates in reserve
which had scarcely been engaged, if Longstreet could only have gotten
them. Along the Union line, it was quite different. At 3:30 P. M.,
Steedman’s division of Granger’s reserve corps came to Thomas’s
assistance. These re-enforcements consisted of Mitchell’s and Whitaker’s
brigades. They drove the Confederates from the rear of Brannan,
strengthened and prolonged the Union line westward. They also passed out
ammunition along the line. While the fighting was so severe the woods
caught on fire. This was caused by the artillery firing so low. Hundreds
of the soldiers, both Union and Confederate, were burned and scorched
beyond recognition. Steedman no doubt saved Thomas from having to
retreat from the hill since the latter’s ammunition supply was
completely exhausted. It was at this point that Thomas gained the name
of “The Rock of Chickamauga.”


                        THE CLOSE OF THE BATTLE

At 4:45 P. M., Thomas received orders from Rosecrans directing him to
withdraw. The withdrawal was not started at this time. There had been
severe fighting in the Kelley field during the afternoon. At 5:00 P. M.
Col. Edward A. King, 68th Indiana Infantry, was killed in the southeast
corner of this field. King commanded the 2nd brigade of Reynolds
division. He was the last of the eight brigade commanders who lost their
lives on the Chickamauga battlefield. Col. Milton S. Robinson assumed
command of his brigade. About 7:00 P. M., Thomas began to withdraw. The
Confederates had gained possession of the LaFayette road to the left and
rear of the Union line. Since Thomas wanted to re-establish his lines
between Bragg and Chattanooga, the withdrawal was made via McFarland Gap
to Rossville; then south on the Chattanooga-LaFayette highway to
Rossville Gap and Missionary Ridge. Fortifications were thrown up along
this portion of the ridge to keep the Confederates in check. The Union
line also extended across Chattanooga Valley and up the slopes of
Lookout Mountain. Thomas held this line along Missionary Ridge
throughout Monday, the 21st. During the night they abandoned this
position and moved into Chattanooga. Thus ended the battle of
Chickamauga.

There were approximately 124,000 troops engaged at Chickamauga. Of this
number, there were 58,000 Union soldiers and 66,000 Confederates. During
the two-day battle, there were 34,000 casualties. Of these casualties,
there were 16,000 Union; 18,000 Confederates.

The Union army had lost the battle of Chickamauga. Still they had
reached their objective—Chattanooga. Bragg’s plan was to attack the
Union troops in Chattanooga on the morning of the 22nd. However, this
failed to materialize. After some light skirmishing it was decided to
call off this attack due to the Union troops being too strongly
entrenched. The Union army was still holding their line up Lookout
Mountain. Soon this line was abandoned since they realized that Bragg
would only have to place forces at any point below in order to have
control of the river line of supplies.


                      REORGANIZATION OF THE ARMIES

Both Rosecrans and Bragg immediately started a reorganization of their
armies. The Confederate army was divided into three corps, the commands
being given to Longstreet, Hardee and Breckinridge. These three corps
had a total of 10 divisions. Wheeler was in command of the cavalry. On
the Union side, McCook and Crittenden were removed from their commands
of the 20th and 21st Army Corps. These two corps were consolidated into
the 4th and Granger was given the command. The Reserve Corps which was
formerly commanded by Granger was consolidated into the 14th Army Corps,
Maj.-Gen. John M. Palmer, commanding. The Union army at this time had
six divisions, commanded by Baird, Cruft, Davis, Johnson, Sheridan and
Wood. The Artillery Reserve was commanded by Brannan. This latter force
consisted of two divisions, each with two brigades. Col. Parkhurst
commanded the Post of Chattanooga.

    [Illustration: Ochs Memorial Observatory, Lookout Mountain]

    [Illustration: Roper’s Rock. Lookout Mountain
    Ladder represents where the Union troops reached the top.]




                        THE SIEGE OF CHATTANOOGA


Bragg was determined to lay siege to the city and force the Union army
into surrendering by starvation. While the Union army was strongly
entrenching their positions in Chattanooga, the Confederates were
establishing their lines on Missionary Ridge, east of the city, and
Lookout Mountain, southwest of the city. A strong picket line was placed
along the river from Chattanooga Creek to a point below Williams Island,
including Brown’s Ferry. Another similar line was placed from just below
the city to a point near the mouth of the Chickamauga Creek. A skirmish
line was thrown out about one mile in front of Missionary Ridge. A short
range of hills, of which Orchard Knob was the highest, was covered by
this skirmish line. These Confederate positions controlled all supply
lines south of the river, which meant railroads, highway and the river
itself. The Union army was soon in dire straits. The only route which
was left open was to cross the river north of the city, then cross
Walden’s Ridge or Signal Mountain; thence down the Sequatchie Valley to
Bridgeport and Stevenson. This route was about 65 miles long and most of
it was mountainous roads. The fall rains had set in and this route was
almost impassable. The Union supply wagons were easy prey for the
Confederate cavalry which had been dispatched north of the river to
conduct raids. Wheeler captured dozens of the supply wagons, killing the
horses and burning the wagons. The Union base of supplies was
Nashville—160 miles distant by very rough roads. Cattle were driven all
this distance in many instances to feed the hungry soldiers. By the time
the cattle reached Chattanooga (if they did not die enroute), they were
so poor that the Union troops often remarked that they had nothing to
eat but “hard tack” and “dried beef on the hoof.” To say the Union
soldiers were in destitute circumstances would be a mild way of
expressing their actual condition. Half rations, then quarter rations
and less. At times the soldiers only had a little raw corn to eat.
Finally it was necessary to place a sentry at the horse troughs in order
to keep the soldiers from taking the grain which was fed to a few choice
mounts. Even then, the Union army lost between 12,000 and 15,000 of
their finest horses and mules from starvation. The troops were in a
starved, sickened condition, and very low in spirits. No doubt they
thought they were doomed, and that no one would come to their rescue
before they starved. However, in this surmise, to their great joy, they
were mistaken. It had been practically a month since their defeat at
Chickamauga, but let us review a little to see what was being done to
relieve this besieged army. Almost immediately after the battle of
Chickamauga, Gen. Grant started Gen. Sherman from Vicksburg with four
divisions (Army of the Tennessee) to the assistance of Rosecrans. These
re-enforcements consisted of the 1st, 2nd and 4th divisions of the 15th
Army Corps, commanded by Brig.-Generals Peter J. Osterhaus, Morgan L.
Smith and Hugh Ewing, respectively. Also the 2nd division of the 17th
Army Corps, commanded by Brig.-Gen. John E. Smith. Thirteen brigades
were represented by Sherman’s re-enforcements.

    [Illustration: Steamboat Being Warped Through “The Suck” Before the
    Dam at Hale’s Bar was built in the Tennessee]

A detachment from the Army of the Potomac consisting of the 11th and
12th Army Corps, commanded by Maj.-Gen. Joseph Hooker, were sent from
Virginia to help lift the siege. The 11th corps was commanded by
Maj.-Gen. O. W. Howard. Howard had the 2nd and 3rd divisions, commanded
by Brig.-Gen. Adolph von Steinwehr and Maj.-Gen. Carl Schurz,
respectively. The 12th corps, commanded by Maj.-Gen. Henry W. Slocum,
had the 1st and 2nd divisions, commanded by Brig.-Generals Alpheus S.
Williams and John W. Geary, respectively. Twelve brigades were
represented by Hooker’s re-enforcements. Hooker’s troops left Virginia
on September 25th. These troops came by the B. and O. Railroad via
Indianapolis, Louisville, Nashville and Bridgeport. The advance of this
column reached Bridgeport September 30th. They were supposed to have
helped to reopen the Tennessee River the next day. This was impossible
due to his supply trains not being here at that time. Rosecrans had
devised a plan whereby the river supply line could be opened up. His
plan was to seize Brown’s Ferry from Chattanooga, and bring Hooker
forward into Lookout Valley at the same time. The execution of this plan
only awaited completion of pontoon-boats for the necessary bridge. When
they were ready, Wheeler made another raid north of the river, delaying
the Union troops again. The date for the execution of this movement was
then set for October 19th. On this date Rosecrans personally selected
the site for throwing the bridge. It has been reported that Rosecrans
rowed a boat himself. When he returned to his headquarters he found
orders relieving him, and placing Thomas in command. On October 23rd,
Gen. Grant arrived in Chattanooga. He approved of Rosecrans’ plan and
ordered it executed at once. Thomas at once repeated Rosecrans’ order to
Hooker, ordering him forward into Lookout Valley. Hooker’s supply trains
reached him October 26th. He left Bridgeport on the 27th, reaching
Brown’s Ferry the next day. In the meantime, during the night of the
26th, a part of two Union brigades marched across Moccasin Point,
concealing themselves near Brown’s Ferry. About 3:00 A. M. of the 27th,
there were 50 pontoon-boats placed in the Tennessee River, each carrying
30 men. These boats floated down the river under cover of darkness,
rounding Moccasin Point unobserved by the Confederate pickets. By a
quick crossing from the north bank to the south bank, they took the
Confederates by surprise and soon captured this position. The
pontoon-boats were then leashed together, forming a bridge across the
river. At this time the troops which had marched to this point crossed
and joined the others on the south bank.

    [Illustration: Military Bridge, Tennessee River, 1863]


                          BATTLE OF WAUHATCHIE

After Hooker’s arrival in Lookout Valley during the afternoon of the
28th, Geary’s division stopped at Wauhatchie, four miles below the
northern point of Lookout Mountain. This was at a junction of the
Nashville and Trenton railroads. Generals Bragg and Longstreet stood on
Lookout and witnessed their arrival. About midnight Geary was attacked
by Jenkins’ division of Longstreet’s corps. The battle lasted until
about 3:30 A. M. Geary was reinforced by two brigades commanded by
Tyndale and Orland Smith. Then the Confederates withdrew across Lookout
Creek and onto the northern slopes of Lookout Mountain. This battle gave
the Union army complete control of all short supply lines. The
Confederates never made any further effort to regain control of this
short route. The starving troops in Chattanooga were hurriedly refitted
and Grant was only awaiting the arrival of Sherman before attacking the
Confederates in their strong positions. Meanwhile, the Confederates were
still clinging to their positions with the utmost confidence in holding
them. On November 4th, Longstreet was sent to Knoxville to oppose Gen.
Burnside. His command constituted about one-third of the Confederates.
Naturally his departure shattered the Confederate hope.

On November 18th, Sherman arrived at Trenton. He moved to Brown’s Ferry
at once, crossing three of his divisions commanded by M. L. Smith, Ewing
and J. E. Smith.

Osterhaus was unable to cross his division due to the breaking of the
bridge. He was then ordered to report to Hooker, which he did at once.
From November 21st to the 23rd, Sherman was in a concealed camp behind
Stringer’s Ridge, and near north Chickamauga Creek. His troops floated
pontoon boats down this stream into the Tennessee River. From the north
side of the river Sherman selected a high hill on the south bank which
he thought was the north end of Missionary Ridge.


                      GEN. GRANT’S PLAN OF BATTLE

Grant had ordered an attack against the Confederates on the 21st. Due to
bad roads, Sherman was unable to reach here by that time. When the
battle did open on the 23rd, it was not according to plan. Under Grant’s
original plan, Hooker was to hold Lookout Valley with Geary’s and
Cruft’s divisions. The 11th corps was to be brought into Chattanooga to
assist either Sherman or Thomas. Sherman was to cross the river at the
mouth of the Chickamauga Creek during the night of the 23rd, and carry
Missionary Ridge as far south as the tunnel, which at this time was not
occupied by the Confederates. When Sherman reached this position, Thomas
was to move to the left, connect with Sherman’s right, sweep up the
valley and crowd the Confederates from their depot at Chickamauga
Station, Tennessee, their communications and positions on the ridge. The
battle did not progress as planned.


                        CAPTURE OF ORCHARD KNOB

On November 23rd, reports reached Grant’s headquarters to the effect
that Confederates had been seen retreating from Missionary Ridge. This
was Buckner’s Corps leaving for Knoxville to assist Longstreet. Grant at
once ordered an attack against Orchard Knob, the outpost of the
Confederates in front of Missionary Ridge. Thomas, with five divisions,
charged out against this position, soon capturing it. The Confederate
pickets moved back to the base of the ridge. Grant then established his
field headquarters at this newly acquired point immediately, where the
entire Confederate line could be seen.


                       BATTLE OF LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN

Hooker’s command had been assigned to Thomas who had obtained permission
for Hooker to make a demonstration against the left of the Confederate
line on Lookout Mountain. During the night of the 23rd, Sherman crossed
the Tennessee River near the present site of the Chickamauga Dam. He
reached the hill he had selected before crossing. He made no effort to
dislodge the Confederates during the 24th. His position was not on the
north end of the ridge as he thought it to be. A deep ravine separated
him from the main north end of the ridge. From this position, the
Confederates could be seen to the south. Early on the morning of the
24th, Hooker left Wauhatchie, moving northward to within two miles of
the point of the mountain. His troops climbed the slopes to the foot of
the palisades, made a march northward until they were near the point.
They were then joined by Osterhaus’ division which came directly up the
northern slopes of the mountain. They were met with a sharp volley of
fire from the Confederates as they emerged from the woods. The
Confederates had two entrenched lines running from the foot of the
cliffs to the river. They were driven out of the first line into an open
field—the Craven’s farm. Here the fighting was desperate and the
casualties were very heavy. The Craven’s house was used as the
Confederate headquarters. The Confederates withdrew to their second line
of entrenchments. While in this latter position the battle ended. The
sharp-shooters and the two Confederate batteries on top were of little
value during the battle. The Union soldiers never reached the top of the
mountain during the battle, nor did they make any effort to. Therefore,
there was no fighting on top of the mountain. It was so foggy during the
day that the artillerymen or sharpshooters on the top were unable to see
the troops on the slopes. The artillery could not have been depressed
sufficiently to reach the Union troops at the foot of the cliffs—almost
directly under them. It was the troops on top that nicknamed this battle
the “Battle Above the Clouds.” The Confederates were outnumbered at
least four to one during this battle. They were in danger of being
surrounded, so during the night Bragg ordered the withdrawal of all
troops from the top, the slopes and Chattanooga Valley. By daylight of
the 25th, all of the Confederates were on Missionary Ridge to strengthen
and prolong their lines at that point.

The withdrawal of the Confederates from Lookout Mountain left the Union
forces in complete control of this point. At sunrise on the morning of
the 25th, there were volunteers from the 96th Illinois and 8th Kentucky
Infantry who scaled the rock palisades and reached the top of the
mountain. They moved to the extreme northern point where they planted
their flag of victory. A series of stairways has been erected to mark
the exact route by which these Union troops climbed out on top of the
mountain.


                     THE BATTLE OF MISSIONARY RIDGE

At this time Sherman was in position to attack the right end of the
Confederate line. Thomas was in front of the center and Hooker was
opposite the left end. About 7:30 A. M., Sherman opened the battle
against the right end with heavy artillery fire. The Confederates of
Cleburne’s, Stevenson’s and Cheatham’s divisions were so strongly
entrenched that he was unable to drive them from their positions. About
10:30, Hooker was ordered forward across the Chattanooga Valley to
attack the left end. The Confederates had destroyed the bridge across
Chattanooga Creek and Hooker was delayed at least three hours in
reaching Rossville. He then moved via Rossville Gap against the
Confederate left. While these movements were being carried out by
Sherman and Hooker, Thomas was to charge out against the Confederate
rifle pits at the base of the ridge. With this latter movement it was
thought the Confederates would be drawn toward the center from both
ends, thereby giving Sherman and Hooker more chance of success toward
turning the ends. Some of Hooker’s troops crossed to the east side of
the ridge; some moved along the crest, and others remained on the west
side of the ridge. At 3:30 P. M., Thomas, with the troops which had
carried Orchard Knob on the 23rd, charged out against the Confederate
rifle pits. After a short battle, the Confederates started their retreat
up the ridge. Thomas’ men pursued without orders, both the Union and
Confederate troops reaching the crest of the ridge about the same time.
The Confederate artillery on top of the ridge was forced to fire high
since their own troops were between their artillery and the Union forces
which were following them. For at least two miles along the central
portion of the ridge, a severe hand-to-hand battle took place. Never in
the entire Civil War did troops fight any harder than they did at this
point. The casualties were heavy on both sides. Finally, the Confederate
center was broken in several places and the center and left end started
to retreat southward. At nightfall, Bragg ordered the right of the
Confederate line to withdraw and cover the general retreat. As the
Confederates were retreating, it is reported that their own artillery
was turned upon them. The Confederates moved south via Chickamauga
Station, Tennessee, thence to Ringgold, Georgia, where they stopped to
offer battle again on November 27th. They retreated to Dalton, Georgia,
where they went into winter quarters on December 1st. Gen. Bragg was
removed from his command the next day. Gen. Hardee was offered the
command but declined, although he accepted temporary charge until
December 16th. At that time Gen. Joseph E. Johnston assumed command—a
position he held until July 17, 1864, when he was replaced by Gen. John
B. Hood. The Union troops moved back to Chattanooga where they
entrenched their position and went into winter quarters, thus
successfully ending the Chattanooga campaign. The city remained in
possession of the Union army until the close of the war.

    [Illustration: Confederate Battery atop Lookout Mountain]

It is estimated that Grant had 60,000 troops engaged in the battle of
Chattanooga. Bragg had approximately 40,000 troops. Of the 60,000 Union
troops, Sherman had 28,000; Thomas 22,000; Hooker 10,000. The casualties
for the three-day battle were: Union, 5,824; Confederate, 6,667.


                                ADDENDA

As a reward for the Union victory at the battle of Chattanooga, both
Grant and Sherman were promoted. First, on March 9, 1864, Grant was
promoted to the rank of Lieutenant-General. On March 12, 1864, he was
placed in command of all the Union forces throughout the United States.
The order which placed Grant in this latter position was presented to
him by President Lincoln. At this time Sherman was in Nashville,
Tennessee. Grant left Washington immediately to join Sherman. Before
leaving Washington, Grant had recommended the appointment of Sherman to
his late position. On March 18, 1864, Sherman assumed command of the
Military Division of the Mississippi—Grant’s former command. This
embraced the Departments of the Ohio, Cumberland, Tennessee and Arkansas
commanded by Major-Generals Schofield, Thomas, McPherson and Steele,
respectively. Grant left Nashville on the night of the 18th, going east
to take over his new command. He was accompanied by Sherman as far as
Cincinnati in order that they might discuss some private details as to
future plans. Sherman returned to Nashville on March 25th. On April
28th, Sherman moved his headquarters to Chattanooga. On May 5th, Sherman
left Chattanooga on the Atlanta Campaign. The movement of his army
followed the exact route which Highway No. 41 follows today from
Chattanooga to Atlanta, with battles and skirmishes all along the way.
After the fall of Atlanta on September 2, 1864, Sherman made final
preparations for his “March to the Sea.” Leaving Atlanta November 16th,
his army moved southward to Savannah, the Union forces entering this
city December 22nd. On February 1, 1865, Sherman left Savannah on the
Carolina Campaign which carried him through North and South Carolina. He
then joined Grant in Virginia, the Civil War soon came to a close.

    [Illustration: Decorative glyph]




             HEAVIEST REGIMENTAL LOSSES—HERE AND ELSEWHERE


At the battle of Chickamauga, the 22nd Michigan Infantry lost 58.

At Lookout Mountain, the 149th N. Y. Infantry lost 10.

At Missionary Ridge, the 15th Indiana Infantry lost 24.

At the battle of Gettysburg (Pa.), the 24th Michigan Infantry (Union)
lost 69 men, while the 26th North Carolina (Confederate) lost 86.

At Vicksburg (Mississippi), the 4th West Virginia, and the 22nd Iowa
(both Union), lost 27 men each.

During the Civil War, there were 10 regiments which in various battles
lost 75 men or more. They are as follows:

  Regiment and Battle                                    Number Killed
  6th Alabama Infantry at Fair Oaks, Va.                       91
  1st Maine Heavy Artillery at Petersburg, Va.                 90
  26th North Carolina Infantry at Gettysburg, Pa.              86
  1st South Carolina Rifles at Gains Mill, Va.                 86
  1st Maine Heavy Artillery at Spotsylvania, Va.               81
  8th New York Infantry at Cold Harbor, Va.                    80
  5th New York Infantry at Manassas, Va.                       79
  70th New York Infantry at Williamsburg, Va.                  79
  1st Missouri Infantry (Union) at Wilson’s Creek, Va.         76
  23rd U. S. Colored at Petersburg Mine, Va.                   75

New York led all other states in the number of troops which they
furnished the Union army. The 10 leaders are as follows:

  New York                 448,850
  Pennsylvania             337,936
  Ohio                     313,180
  Illinois                 259,092
  Indiana                  196,363
  Massachusetts            146,730
  Missouri[1]              109,111
  Wisconsin                 91,327
  Michigan                  87,364
  New Jersey                76,814
  Iowa                      76,242
  Kentucky[1]               75,670


[1]Divided states.


The leading Union and Confederate officers who were in the battles of
Chickamauga, or Chattanooga, or both, are as follows:


                                 UNION

  Gen. Ulysses S. Grant
  Maj. Gen. William S. Rosecrans
  Maj. Gen. William T. Sherman
  Maj. Gen. George H. Thomas
  Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker
  Maj. Gen. Gordon Granger
  Maj. Gen. Thomas L. Crittenden
  Maj. Gen. Alexander McD. McCook


                              CONFEDERATE

  Gen. Braxton Bragg
  Lt. Gen. James Longstreet
  Maj.-Gen. Simon B. Buckner
  Lt. Gen. Leonidas Polk
  Brig. Gen. John B. Hood
  Brig. Gen. Nathan B. Forrest
  Maj. Gen. Joseph Wheeler
  Lt. Gen. Daniel H. Hill

In order that you may know where these high-ranking officers were from,
the following offers an accurate account:


                                 UNION

  1. Gen. Grant was born in Point Pleasant, Ohio, April 27, 1822.
    Died in Mt. McGregor (near Saratoga), N. Y., July 23, 1885.
  2. Gen. Rosecrans was born in Kingston, Ohio, Sept. 6, 1818.
    Died in Redondo, California, March 11, 1898.
  3. Gen. Sherman was born in Lancaster, Ohio, Feb. 8, 1820.
    Died in New York, Feb. 14, 1891.
  4. Gen. Thomas was born in Southhampton Co., Va., July 31, 1816.
    Died in San Francisco, California, March 28, 1870.
  5. Gen. Hooker was born in Hadley, Mass., Nov. 13, 1814.
    Died in Philadelphia, Pa., Nov. 6, 1872.
  6. Gen. Granger was born in New York, N. Y., in 1821.
    Died in Santa Fe., New Mexico, Jan. 10, 1876.
  7. Gen. Crittenden was born in Russellville, Ky., May 15, 1815.
    Died in Staten Island, N. Y., Oct. 23, 1893.
  8. Gen. McCook was born in Columbiana Co., Ohio, April 22, 1831.
    Died in Dayton, Ohio, June 12, 1903.


                              CONFEDERATES

  1. Gen. Bragg was born in Warren Co., N. C., March 22, 1817.
    Died in Galveston, Texas, Sept. 27, 1876.
  2. Gen. Longstreet was born in Edgefield District, S. C., Jan. 8,
              1821.
    Died in Gainesville, Georgia, Jan. 2, 1904.
  3. Gen. Hood was born in Owingsville, Ky., June 1, 1831.
    Died in New Orleans, La., Aug. 30, 1879.
  4. Gen. Buckner was born in Munfordville, Ky., April 1, 1823.
    Died at same place Jan. 8, 1914.
  5. Gen. Polk was born in Raleigh, N. C., April 10, 1806.
    Killed by a cannon-ball on Pine Mt., near Marietta, Ga., June 14,
              1864.
  6. Gen. Forrest was born near Chapel Hill, Tenn., July 13, 1821.
    Died in Memphis, Tenn., Oct. 29, 1877.
  7. Gen. Wheeler was born in Augusta, Ga., Sept. 10, 1836.
    Died in Brooklyn, N. Y., Jan. 25, 1906.
  8. Gen. Daniel H. Hill was born in Hill’s Iron Work, York District, S.
              C., July 12, 1821.
    Died in Charlotte, N. C., Sept. 25, 1889.




                           CIVIL WAR PRISONS


While there were numerous Civil War Prisons, both in the North and
South, it is believed that the following were the most prominent:

                       NORTHERN PRISONS
           Name                        Location

  Camp Chase               Columbus, Ohio
  Camp Morton              Indianapolis, Indiana
  Elmira Prison Barracks   Elmira, New York
  Fort Delaware            In Delaware River
  Fort Lafayette           New York, N. Y.
  Fort McHenry             Baltimore, Maryland

                       SOUTHERN PRISONS
           Name                        Location

  Andersonville Prison     Andersonville, Georgia
  Libby Prison             Richmond, Virginia
  Belle Isle               In James River—Near Richmond, Va.
  Camp Lawton              Millen, Georgia
  Castle Pickney           Charleston, South Carolina
  Camp Ford                Tyler, Texas




                          DID YOU KNOW THAT...


The first shot in the Civil War was fired upon the steamer “Star of the
West” off Charleston Harbor, S. C., on Jan. 9, 1861. However, this was
more than three months before the war officially started.

The Civil War started with the bombardment of Fort Sumter, S. C., at
4:30 A. M., April 12, 1861.

The first Southern blood was shed on the streets of Baltimore, Md., on
April 19, 1861.

The First Confederate Congress was formed in Montgomery, Ala., on Feb.
4, 1861.

Jefferson Davis, of Mississippi, was elected President of the
Confederacy on Feb. 9, 1861. Alexander H. Stephens of Georgia was
elected Vice-President. The inauguration was on Feb. 18, 1861.

President Lincoln freed the slaves on Sept. 22, 1862.

The Gatling gun was patented Nov. 4, 1862.

The First Colored Regiment was formed Jan. 25, 1863.

South Carolina was the first state to secede; North Carolina was the
last. South Carolina seceded from the Union on Dec. 20, 1860. The other
states followed in this order: Florida on Jan. 7, 1861; Mississippi on
Jan. 9, 1861; Alabama on Jan. 11, 1861; Georgia on Jan. 19, 1861;
Louisiana on Jan. 26, 1861; Texas on Feb. 1, 1861; Virginia on April 17,
1861; Tennessee on May 6, 1861; Arkansas on May 18, 1861, and North
Carolina on May 21, 1861.

There were more battles fought in Virginia than in any other state. It
is reported that more than 400 battles and actions were fought there.
The second largest number was fought in Tennessee.

The most eventful “holiday” in the Civil War was July 4, 1863. On this
particular date the Tullahoma Campaign ended; the Union army was
victorious at Gettysburg and Vicksburg fell.

Pickett’s famous charge at Gettysburg was the most colorful event of the
Civil War.

Ohio furnished almost one-third of the Union troops at the battles of
Chickamauga and Chattanooga.

General Robert E. Lee was once offered the command of all the Union
forces in the United States, but he declined the offer.

Gen. Albert Sidney Johnston, one of the South’s ablest commanders,
resigned the Colonelcy of the 2nd U. S. Cavalry to enter the service of
the Confederacy. Gen. Johnston was killed at the Battle of Shiloh.

There were approximately 87,000 men who hired their fighting done. This
number, whom were drafted, paid commutation and were exempted from
service.

There were almost an even 100,000 of the U. S. Colored Troops whom were
recruited from the Confederate States.

About 250 of the Regular U. S. Volunteers were ex-Confederate soldiers.

All of the Confederate States had troops in the Union Army. The data
below will furnish proof of this statement:

Alabama—1 Regiment Heavy Artillery; 2 Regiments of Cavalry; 1 Co. of
      Cavalry; 2 Regiments of Infantry.

Arkansas—2 Batteries of Light Artillery; 4 Regiments of Cavalry; 1 Co.
      of Cavalry; 1 Infantry Battalion; 1 Co. of Infantry; 9 Regiments
      of Infantry.

Florida—1 Battery of Light Artillery; 3 Regiments of Cavalry; 1 Co. of
      Infantry.

Georgia—1 Infantry Battalion.

Louisiana—1 Regiment of Heavy Artillery; 1 Battery of Light Artillery; 4
      Regiments of Light Artillery; 1 Co. of Cavalry; 3 Regiments of
      Cavalry; 18 Regiments of Infantry.

Mississippi—2 Regiments of Heavy Artillery; 2 Regiments of Cavalry; 2
      Cos. of Cavalry; 9 Regiments of Infantry.

North Carolina—1 Regiment of Heavy Artillery; 7 Regiments of Infantry.

South Carolina—5 Regiments of Infantry (all Colored).

Texas—1 Battalion of Cavalry; 2 Regiments of Cavalry; 3 Cos. of
      Infantry.

Virginia—1 Battalion of Cavalry; 1 Regiment of Infantry; 1 Co. of
      Infantry.

There were four states which were considered “divided” states, namely:
Tennessee, Kentucky, Missouri and Maryland. Tennessee furnished more
Confederate troops than Union troops. The others furnished more Union
troops than Confederates.

The highest regimental number of the Civil War was furnished by the
State of Pennsylvania, being the 215th. Ohio was second with 197: New
York third with 193, while Illinois and Indiana tied for fourth place
with 156 each.

West Point Academy was founded on March 16, 1802.

The U. S. Naval Academy opened October 10, 1845.

The Mexican War started on March 28, 1846.

The most daring and useless episode of the Civil War was performed by
Andrews and his raiders when they stole the engine “General.” This feat,
if it had been carried out in detail, would only have been temporary.
The tearing up of railroad bridges and the destruction of communication
lines was almost daily routine at one place or another. This historic
engine is now on display at the Union railroad station, Ninth and Broad
Streets, Chattanooga, Tennessee.

The Chattanooga National Cemetery is the oldest National Cemetery in the
United States. There are soldiers buried in this cemetery as a result of
every war the United States has ever participated in, beginning with the
Revolutionary War.

There are no Confederate soldiers buried in any National Cemetery. They
are buried in Confederate cemeteries or elsewhere. Two such cemeteries
are located in, and near Chattanooga. One is located on E. Third Street,
adjoining the Jewish Cemetery. The other is located on U. S. Highways
No. 11 and 64 at Silverdale, about 10 miles northeast of Chattanooga.

Practically all of the Union and Confederate soldiers who were killed at
Chickamauga were buried on that battlefield for a period of about three
months. The troops were buried in separate trenches. Then they were
removed. The Union soldiers were re-buried in the National Cemetery in
Chattanooga. The Confederates were taken to Marietta, Georgia, where
they were reburied in the Confederate Cemetery.

    [Illustration: General Wilder’s Monument, Chickamauga Battlefield]

    [Illustration: View of Lover’s Leap, Rock City Gardens, atop Lookout
    Mountain]

The last battle of the Civil War was fought near Palo Alto, Texas, on
May 13, 1865, more than a month after Lee’s surrender at Appomattox.
Col. Barrett commanded the Union troops; Gen. Slaughter the Confederate.
This battle resulted in a Confederate victory.




                     HISTORIC SITES IN CHATTANOOGA


There are numerous headquarters sites in Chattanooga today which were
very prominent during the Civil War. In order that you may know the
exact location of these sites, they are as follows:

The headquarters of Gen. U. S. Grant and his successor, Gen. William T.
Sherman, is a frame house located at 110 East First Street, between
Walnut and Cherry streets.

The northeast corner of Fourth and Walnut streets marks the headquarters
of Gen. James A. Garfield, Chief of Staff to Gen. Rosecrans, and Gen.
Joseph J. Reynolds, Chief of Staff to Gen. Thomas.

Upon first occupation of Chattanooga by Union troops, Brig. Gen. George
D. Wagner established headquarters at 407 East Fifth Street. There is a
short post erected at this address to mark the site.

Fort Sheridan was located at 1219 East Terrace. A shell pyramid has been
erected at this site.

The Standpipe of the City Water Company of Chattanooga marks the center
of Fort Wood.

A short post at 502 East Fifth Street marks the location of Lunette
O’Meara.

Fort Milhalotzy was located on Cameron Hill. A stone gate post at 221
Boynton Terrace marks the exact location.

Brig. Gen. Thomas J. Wood, U. S. V., commanding the 3rd and 4th Army
Corps, had his headquarters at 504 Vine Street, where a short post is
today.

The site of Fort Phelps (Negley) which was begun by the Confederates as
Fort Cheatham is located at 1706 Read Avenue.

Maj. Gen. Joseph Wheeler, C. S. A., commanding Cavalry Corps, had his
headquarters at 515 Douglas Street.

At 309 West Sixth Street you will see a long post which marks the
headquarters of Lt. Gen. Daniel C. Hill, C. S. A., command corps, and
later this same site was used by Maj. Gen. John M. Palmer, U. S. V.,
commanding 14th Army Corps, Army of the Cumberland.

Maj. Gen. John C. Breckinridge, C. S. A., commanding a division, had his
headquarters at 415 Poplar Street.

Battery Smartt, Confederate work of Cheatham’s division, was located at
10 Bluff View, where a concrete post has been erected.

Gen. Bragg’s headquarters in 1862 were at 407 East Fifth Street.

The southeast corner of Fifth and Walnut streets is the Signal Hill site
of Redoubt Putnam, south salient of Fort Sherman.

The Crutchfield House was located where the Ninth Street entrance to the
Read House is today.

The 10th Ohio Volunteer Infantry was camped at 654 Houston Street.
Incidentally, this is where the first shell fired from Lookout Mountain
exploded.

The Custom House lawn on East Eleventh Street marks the location of
Redoubt Jones’ (Hazen) headquarters.

Battery Bushnell was located at the northeast corner of Battery Place
and Linsay streets.

Brig. Gen. John M. Brannan, Chief of Artillery, Army of the Cumberland,
had his headquarters at 302 Walnut Street.

Brig. Gen. Absalom Baird, U. S. V., commanding 14th Army Corps, was
located on the south side of West Ninth Street, between East Terrace and
Cedar Streets. A long post at this address marks the site.

The College building which accommodated 100 wounded soldiers was located
on the northeast corner West Eleventh and Cedar streets.




    ORGANIZATION OF THE UNION AND CONFEDERATE ARMIES AT CHICKAMAUGA


                                 UNION

The Army of the Cumberland (Union) commanded by Maj. Gen. William S.
Rosecrans, consisted of the following:

  14th Army Corps       Maj. Gen. George H. Thomas
  20th Army Corps       Maj. Gen. Alexander McD. McCook
  21st Army Corps       Maj. Gen. Thomas L. Crittenden
  Cavalry Corps         Brig. Gen. Robert B. Mitchell
  Reserve Corps         Maj. Gen. Gordon Granger

  Thomas had 4 divisions, commanded by Baird, Negley, Brannan and
              Reynolds.
    Baird had 3 brigades, commanded by Scribner, Starkweather and John
              H. King.
    Negley had 3 brigades, commanded by John Beatty, Stanley and
              Sirwell.
    Brannan had 3 brigades, commanded by Connell, Croxton and Van
              Derveer.
    Reynolds had 3 brigades, commanded by Wilder, Edward A. King and
              Turchin.
  McCook had 3 divisions, commanded by Jefferson C. Davis, Richard W.
              Johnson and Sheridan.
    Davis had 3 brigades, commanded by Post, Carlin and Heg.
    Johnson had 3 brigades, commanded by Willich, Dodge and Baldwin.
    Sheridan had 3 brigades, commanded by Lytle, Laiboldt and Bradley.
  Crittenden had 3 divisions, commanded by Thomas J. Wood, Palmer and
              Van Cleve.
    Wood had 3 brigades, commanded by Geo. P. Buell, Wagner and Harker.
    Palmer had 3 brigades, commanded by Cruft, Hazen and Gross.
    Van Cleve had 3 brigades, commanded by Sam Beatty, Dick and Barnes.
  Granger had 1 division, commanded by Steedman, consisting of 2
              brigades, commanded by Whitaker and Mitchell. The 2nd
              brigade of Morgan’s division commanded by Daniel McCook,
              also participated in the battle.
  Mitchell had 2 divisions, commanded by Edward M. McCook and Crook.
    McCook had 3 brigades, commanded by Campbell, Ray and Watkins.
    Crook had 2 brigades, commanded by Minty and Long.

Of these 38 brigades, 36 were engaged. Post’s brigade was guarding
supply trains. Wagner’s brigade was stationed at Chattanooga during the
battle. Wilder’s brigade was detached and serving as mounted infantry.
There were two regiments not engaged. The 9th Michigan Infantry and the
38th Ohio Infantry were guarding trains and performing Provost Duty. The
39th Indiana Infantry also served as mounted infantry (being detached).


                              CONFEDERATE

The Army of Tennessee, commanded by Gen. Braxton Bragg, consisted of the
following:

  Buckner’s Corps
  Hill’s Corps
  Longstreet’s (Hood’s) Corps
  Polk’s Corps
  Walker’s (Reserve) Corps
  Forrest’s (Cavalry) Corps
  Wheeler’s (Cavalry) Corps

  Buckner had 2 divisions, commanded by Stewart and Preston.
    Stewart had 3 brigades, commanded by Bates, Clayton and Brown.
    Preston had 3 brigades, commanded by Gracie, Trigg and Kelly.
  Hill had 2 divisions, commanded by Cleburne and Breckinridge.
    Cleburne had 3 brigades, commanded by Wood, Polk and Deshler.
    Breckinridge had 3 brigades, commanded by Helm, Adams and Stovall.
  Longstreet had 3 divisions, commanded by McLaws, Hood and Johnson.
    McLaw’s had 4 brigades, commanded by Kershaw, Wofford, Humphreys and
              Bryan.
    Hood had 5 brigades, commanded by Jenkins, Law, Robertson,
              Anderson-Benning.
    Johnson had 3 brigades, commanded by Gregg, McNair and Johnson.
  Polk had 2 divisions, commanded by Cheatham and Hindman.
    Cheatham had 5 brigades, commanded by Jackson, Maney, Smith, Wright
              and Strahl.
    Hindman had 3 brigades, commanded by Anderson, Deas and Manigault.
  Walker had 2 divisions, commanded by Gist and Liddell.
    Gist had 3 brigades, commanded by Colquitt, Ector and Wilson.
    Liddell had 2 brigades, commanded by Govan and Walthall.
  Forrest had 2 divisions, commanded by Armstrong and Pegram.
    Armstrong had 2 brigades, commanded by James T. Wheeler and Dibrell.
    Pegram had 2 brigades, commanded by Davidson and Scott.
  Wheeler had 2 divisions, commanded by Wharton and Martin.
    Wharton had 2 brigades, commanded by Crews and Harrison.
    Martin had 2 brigades, commanded by Morgan and Russell.

    [Illustration: Point Park on Lookout Mountain is easily reached by
    well paved highways.]

    [Illustration: The Old Man of the Mountain—Natural Rock, Lookout
    Mountain]

Of a total of 47 brigades (including 2 artillery brigades), 43 of them
were engaged. Bryan, Wofford and Jenkins did not arrive in time for
battle. Longstreet’s Artillery Corps failed to arrive in time for the
battle.

Complete index of the Union and Confederate troops who participated in
the battles of Chickamauga, Chattanooga, or both.


                              UNION TROOPS


                              Connecticut

Infantry—5th and 20th.


                                Illinois

Infantry—10th, 13th, 16th, 19th, 21st, 22nd, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th,
      29th, 34th, 35th, 36th, 38th, 40th, 42nd, 44th, 48th, 51st, 55th,
      56th, 59th, 60th, 63rd, 73rd, 74th, 75th, 78th, 79th, 80th, 82nd,
      84th, 85th, 86th, 88th, 89th, 90th, 92nd, 93rd, 96th, 100th,
      101st, 103rd, 104th, 110th, 115th, 116th, 123rd, 125th, 127th.

Artillery—Batteries, A, B, C, F, H, I, M, of 1st Illinois Light
      Artillery.
Battery “I” of 2nd Illinois Light Artillery.
Bridges’ Battery of Illinois Light Artillery.
Chicago Board of Trade Battery.
Cogswell’s Illinois Battery.

Cavalry—Co. K, 15th Illinois Cavalry.


                                Indiana

Infantry—6th, 9th, 10th, 12th, 15th, 17th, 22nd, 27th, 29th, 30th, 31st,
      32nd, 35th, 36th, 37th, 38th, 39th, 40th, 42nd, 44th, 48th, 51st,
      52nd, 57th, 58th, 59th, 68th, 72nd, 74th, 75th, 79th, 81st, 82nd,
      83rd, 84th, 86th, 87th, 88th, 97th, 99th, 100th, 101st.

Artillery—4th, 5th, 7th, 8th, 10th, 11th, 18th, 19th, 21st, Batteries of
      Indiana Light Artillery.

Cavalry—2nd, 3rd, 4th.


                                  Iowa

Infantry—4th, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th, 17th, 25th, 26th, 30th, 31st.

Artillery—1st Battery of Iowa Light Artillery.


                                 Kansas

Infantry—8th.


                            Kentucky (Union)

Infantry—1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 15th, 17th, 18th,
      21st, 23rd.

Cavalry—2nd, 4th, 5th, 6th.


                                 Maine

Infantry—1st Battalion 10th Infantry.


                                Maryland

Infantry—3rd.


                             Massachusetts

Infantry—2nd, 33rd.


                                Michigan

Infantry—9th, 10th, 11th, 13th, 14th, 15th, 21st, 22nd.
1st Michigan Engineers.

Cavalry—2nd, 4th.

Artillery—Batteries “A” and “D” of 1st Light Artillery.


                               Minnesota

Infantry—2nd, 4th.

Artillery—2nd Battery of Minnesota Light Artillery.


                            Missouri (Union)

Infantry—2nd, 3rd, 6th, 8th, 10th, 12th, 15th, 17th, 24th, 26th, 27th,
      29th, 31st, 32nd.

Artillery—Batteries “D” and “G” of 1st Light Artillery. Battery “F” of
      2nd Light Artillery.


                               New Jersey

Infantry—13th, 33rd.


                                New York

Infantry—8th (Independent Co.), 45th, 58th, 60th, 68th, 78th, 102nd,
      107th, 119th, 123rd, 134th, 136th, 137th, 141st, 143rd, 145th,
      149th, 150th, 154th.

Artillery—Battery “I” of 1st Light Artillery. 13th Battery of Light
      Artillery.


                                  Ohio

Infantry—1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 7th, 9th, 10th, 11th, 13th, 14th,
      15th, 17th, 18th, 19th, 21st, 24th, 26th, 29th, 30th, 31st, 33rd,
      35th, 36th, 37th, 38th, 40th, 41st, 46th, 47th, 49th, 51st, 52nd,
      53rd, 54th, 55th, 57th, 59th, 61st, 64th, 65th, 66th, 69th, 70th,
      73rd, 74th, 76th, 80th, 82nd, 89th, 90th, 92nd, 93rd, 94th, 97th,
      98th, 99th, 101st, 105th, 108th, 113th, 121st, 124th, 125th. 1st
      Battalion Sharpshooters.

Artillery—Batteries A, B, C, D, E, F, G, I, K, M, of 1st Ohio Light
      Artillery. 4th, 6th, 18th, 20th Batteries of Ohio Light Artillery.

Cavalry—1st, 3rd, 4th, 10th.


                              Pennsylvania

Infantry—27th, 28th, 29th, 46th, 73rd, 75th, 77th, 78th, 79th, 109th,
      111th.

Artillery—Batteries “B” and “E” of Pennsylvania Light Artillery.
Battery “B” of 26th Pennsylvania Independent Artillery.

Cavalry—7th, 9th, 15th.


                             West Virginia

Infantry—4th.


                               Wisconsin

Infantry—1st, 3rd, 10th, 15th, 18th, 21st, 24th, 26th.

Artillery—3rd, 5th, 6th, 8th, 10th, 12th, Batteries of Light Artillery.
Company “C” of 1st Heavy Artillery.

Cavalry—1st.


                           Tennessee (Union)

Artillery—Battery “A” of 1st Tennessee Light Artillery.

Cavalry—1st, 2nd.


                             U. S. Regulars

Infantry—15th, 16th, 18th, 19th.
1st Battalion of 13th.

Artillery—Batteries G, H, I, M of 4th U. S. Artillery.
Batteries H and K of 5th U. S. Artillery.

Cavalry—4th.


                           CONFEDERATE TROOPS


                                Alabama

Infantry—4th, 14th, 15th, 16th, 17th, 18th, 19th, 20th, 22nd, 23rd,
      24th, 25th, 28th, 30th, 31st, 32nd, 33rd, 34th, 36th, 37th, 38th,
      39th, 40th, 41st, 42nd, 43rd, 44th, 45th, 46th, 47th, 48th, 50th,
      58th. 17th Battalion Sharpshooters; 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th Alabama
      Battalions; 18th Alabama Battalion; Hilliard’s Legion; Stone’s
      Battalion Sharpshooters.

Cavalry—1st, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 51st, 53rd, Holloway’s Company Alabama
      Cavalry; Lenoir’s Company Alabama Cavalry; Malone’s Regiment
      Alabama Cavalry; Moreland’s Battalion Alabama Cavalry.

Artillery—Dent’s Eufaula’s, Fowler’s, Garrity’s, Kolb’s, Lumsden’s,
      Oliver’s, Semple’s and Water’s Alabama Batteries.


                                Arkansas

Infantry—1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 13th, 15th, 19th, 24th,
      25th, 31st.
4th Arkansas Battalion; 1st and 2nd Arkansas Mounted Rifles.

Cavalry—3rd.

Artillery—Calvert’s, Humphrey’s, Wiggins’ Arkansas Batteries.


                                Florida

Infantry—1st, 3rd, 4th, 6th, 7th.

Cavalry—1st (Dismounted).

Artillery—McCant’s Florida Battery.


                                Georgia

Infantry—1st Georgia (Confederate), 2nd, 5th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th,
      15th, 16th, 17th, 18th, 20th, 24th, 25th, 29th, 30th, 34th, 36th,
      37th, 39th, 40th, 41st, 42nd, 43rd, 46th, 47th, 50th, 51st, 52nd,
      53rd, 56th, 59th, 65th. 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 8th Battalions
      Sharpshooters; 26th Georgia Battalion: Cobbs’s and Phillip’s
      Legion; 1st, 3rd, 5th, 8th and 10th Confederates.

Cavalry—1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 6th.

Artillery—Corput’s, Dawson’s, Ferrell’s, Havis’, Howell’s, Massenburg’s,
      Peeple’s, Rowan’s, Scogins’, Wolihin’s, York’s Georgia Batteries.

    [Illustration: THE “GENERAL”
    It was stolen by Andrews’ Raiders. Now in Union Station,
    Chattanooga, Tennessee]


                         Kentucky (Confederate)

Infantry—2nd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 9th. John H. Morgan’s dismounted men.

Cavalry—1st, 2nd, 3rd, 9th. Clay’s, Jessee’s, Johnson’s Battalions
      Cavalry.

Artillery—Cobb’s and Graves’ Kentucky Batteries.


                               Louisiana

Infantry—1st (Regulars), 13th, 16th, 19th, 20th, 25th. 4th and 14th
      Battalions Sharpshooters.

Cavalry—1st. Dreux’s and Greenleaf’s Company Louisiana Cavalry.

Artillery—LeGardeur’s, Moody’s, Robinson’s (1 section), Slocomb’s
      Louisiana Batteries.


                              Mississippi

Infantry—5th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 13th, 17th, 18th, 21st, 24th, 27th,
      29th, 30th, 32nd, 34th, 41st, 44th, 45th. Pound’s Battalion
      Sharpshooters; 9th and 15th Battalions Sharpshooters.

Cavalry—Foule’s Company Mississippi Cavalry.

Artillery—Darden’s, Smith’s, Standford’s, Sweet’s, Mississippi
      Batteries.
Warren’s Battery of Mississippi Light Artillery.


                         Missouri (Confederate)

Infantry—None.

Cavalry—None.

Artillery—Barret’s and Bledsoe’s Missouri Batteries.


                             North Carolina

Infantry—29th, 39th, 58th, 60th.

Cavalry—6th.

Artillery—None.


                             South Carolina

Infantry—1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 15th, 16th, 19th,
      24th.
3rd Battalion; 2nd South Carolina Rifles; Hampton’s Legion; Palmetto
      Sharpshooters.

Cavalry—None.

Artillery—Culpepper’s, Ferguson’s, Fickling’s, James’ South Carolina
      Batteries.


                        Tennessee (Confederate)

Infantry—1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th,
      15th, 16th, 17th, 18th, 19th, 20th, 23rd, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th,
      28th, 29th, 30th, 31st, 32nd, 33rd, 35th, 37th, 38th, 39th, 41st,
      43rd, 44th, 45th, 47th, 48th, 50th, 51st, 52nd, 59th, 63rd, 154th.
      1st and 23rd Tennessee Battalions; Murray’s Tennessee Battalions;
      3rd and 4th Provisional Army; 24th Battalion Sharpshooters;
      Dawson’s Battalion Sharpshooters; 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 9th
      Confederates.

Cavalry—1st, 2nd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th. Clark’s,
      Jackson’s, Sanders’ Company Tennessee Cavalry; Hamilton’s and
      Shaw’s Tennessee Battalions; Allison’s Tennessee Squadron; 12th,
      16th and 18th Battalions; Rucker’s Legion.

Artillery—Baxter’s, Carnes’, Huggins’, Huwald’s, Marshall’s, Mebane’s,
      Morton’s, Scott’s and White’s Tennessee Batteries.


                                 Texas

Infantry—1st, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 9th, 10th.

Cavalry—8th, 10th, 11th, 14th, 15th, 17th, 18th, 24th, 25th, 32nd.
      (10th, 14th, 15th, 17th, 32nd dismounted—serving as infantry).

Artillery—Douglas’ Texas Battery.


                                Virginia

Infantry—54th, 63rd.

Cavalry—Edmundson’s Battalion Cavalry.

Artillery—Jeffress’, Jordan’s, Parker’s, Taylor’s and Woolfolk’s
      Virginia Batteries.


NOTE: Copies of this Booklet will be mailed direct, postpaid, upon
      receipt of 50 cents to—

                              J. L. ROGERS
                           3203 Dayton Blvd.
                         CHATTANOOGA, TENNESSEE

    [Illustration: Lookout Mountain Incline. The world’s largest,
    safest, steepest passenger Incline. A direct route to beautiful
    Point Park, the outstanding feature on Lookout Mountain.]


         MILEAGE AND ROUTE INFORMATION FROM CHATTANOOGA, TENN.

            CITY             Miles                 ROUTES

  Akron, Ohio                   567  27-68-62-3-5
  Asheville, N. C.              206  64-19
  Atlanta, Ga.                  119  41
  Atlantic City, N. J.          798  11-211-1-40
  Augusta, Ga.                  273  41-53-129-78

                                    B

  Baltimore, Md.                660  11-11W-11-117-11-211-1
  Baton Rouge, La.              559  11-11A-11-26-7-190
  Birmingham, Ala.              150  11-11A-11
  Bluefield, W. Va.             320  11-11W-23-71-19
  Boston, Mass.                1060  N.Y.—Pkwys. 15-20-9
  Bowling Green, Ky.            189  41-231
  Brunswick, Ga.                404  41-341 or 41-23-341
  Buffalo, N. Y.                777  27-68-62-3-42-20-5

                                    C

  Cedar Rapids, Ia.             762  Via St. Louis 61-218
  Charleston, W. Va.            438  11-33-25E-119
  Charleston, S. C.             416  41-53-129-78
  Charlotte, N. C.              317  64-19-74
  Chicago, Ill.                 593  41-41A-41
  Cincinnati, O.                350  27-25 (359 Mi. Via 27)
  Cleveland, Ohio               585  27-68-3-42
  Clearwater, Fla.              616  41-19
  Columbia, S. C.               328  41-53-129-78-378
  Columbus, Ga.                 210  27
  Columbus, Ohio                444  27-68-62

                                    D

  Dallas, Tex.                  801  64-70-67
  Davenport, Ia.                660  41-41A-41-50-1-150
  Dayton, Ohio                  402  27-25
  Daytona Beach, Fla.           538  41-341-41-100-1 or Atlanta 23-1
  Denver, Col.                 1326  St. Louis—40-24-40
  Des Moines, Ia.               805  St. Louis—40-63-163
  Detroit, Mich.                608  27-25 or 27-227-68-24-25

                                    E

  El Paso, Tex.                1431  64-70-67-80
  Evansville, Ind.              308  41-41A-41

                                    F

  Ft. Myers, Fla.               709  41-341-41
  Ft. Wayne, Ind.               503  27-25-127-177-227-27
  Frankfort, Ky.                276  27-150-35

                                    G

  Gatlinburg, Tenn.             146  64-411-73
  Grand Rapids, Mich.           652  Ft. Wayne—33-13-131
  Greensboro, N. C.             389  64-19-70

                                    H

  Hartford, Conn.               959  N.Y.—Pkwys. 15-5
  Houston, Texas                839  11-11A-11-26-7-190-185-90

                                    I

  Indianapolis, Ind.            415  41-231-31E-351-31W-31

                                    J

  Jackson, Miss.                404  11-11A-11-80
  Jacksonville, Fla.            444  41-341-23 or Atlanta 23

                                    K

  Kansas City, Mo.              710  41-41A-41-68-45-146-3-40
  Key West, Fla.                953  41-341-41-100-1
  Knoxville, Tenn.              114  11

                                    L

  Lake City, Fla.               421  41-341-41
  Lansing, Mich.                627  27-25-127
  Lexington, Ky.                267  27
  Little Rock, Ark.             458  64-70
  Los Angeles, Calif.          2169  64-266-62-66-89A-89 71-60
  Louisville, Ky.               302  41-231-31E-351-31W

                                    M

  Macon, Ga.                    212  41 or Atlanta 23
  Mammoth Cave, Ky.             223  41-231-31E-351-31W-70
  Memphis, Tenn.                325  64
  Meridian, Miss.               309  11-11A-11
  Miami, Fla.                   796  Daytona—1 (869 Mi. Via 27)
  Milwaukee, Wis.               675  41-41A-41
  Minneapolis, Minn.            987  41-41A-52-45-12
  Mobile, Ala.                  403  11-11A-11-5-43
  Montgomery, Ala.              239  11-241-231 (250 Mi. -11 11A-31)

                                    N

  Nashville, Tenn.              138  41
  New Haven, Conn.              922  New York—1
  New Orleans, La.              515  11-11A-11
  New York City, N. Y.          854  11-11W-11-117-11-211 I-40—N.J.
                                     Tnpk. 1
  Norfolk, Va.                  619  11-11W-11-52-58—Ferry or Tunnel

                                    O

  Oklahoma City, Okla.          806  64-266-62
  Omaha, Nebr.                  918  St. Louis—61-36-71-275
  Orlando, Fla.                 585  41-341-41-27-441

                                    P

  Paducah, Ky.                  291  41-68
  Palm Beach, Fla.              730  41-341-41-100-1
  Peoria, Ill.                  560  41-41A-41-50-1-150
  Philadelphia, Pa.             759  11-11W-11-117-11-211 1-40-13
  Pittsburgh, Pa.               618  11-11W-23-71-19
  Providence, R. I.            1024  N.Y. Pkwys. 15-6A-6

                                    R

  Raleigh, N. C.                456  64-19-70-64
  Richmond, Va.                 557  11-11W-11-460-24-60
  Roanoke, Va.                  339  11-11W-11
  Rock City                       6  41-58

                                    S

  St. Augustine, Fla.           482  41-341-23-1
  St. Louis, Mo.                462  41-41A-68-45-146-3-40
  St. Petersburg, Fla.          610  41-341-41-92 or 41-19
  Salt Lake City, Utah          839  St. Louis—40-24-40
  San Antonio, Tex.            1019  11-11A-11-26-7-190 165-90
  San Francisco, Calif.        2491  64-266-62-66-466-99-50
  Sarasota, Fla.                643  41-341-41
  Savannah, Ga.                 389  Macon—80
  Shreveport, La.               630  11-80
  Silver Springs, Fla.          512  41-341-41-27-40
  Spokane, Wash.               2439  41-14-16-87-10

                                    T

  Tallahassee, Fla.             378  27
  Tampa, Fla.                   590  41-341-41
  Terre Haute, Ind.             408  41-41A-41
  Texarkana, Ark.               613  64-70-67
  Toledo, Ohio                  551  27-25 or 27-227-68
  Toronto, Ontario              839  Detroit—Canada 2-5

                                    V

  Valdosta, Ga.                 357  41-341-41

                                    W

  Washington, D. C.             622  11-11W-11-117-11-211
  Wheeling, W. Va.              563  11-33-25E-119-21-2
  Wilmington. Del.              731  11-11W-11-117-11-211 1-40-13
  Wilmington, N. C.             519  41-53-129-78-378-76
  Winston Salem, N. C.          360  64-19-70-64-158




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Civil War Battles of Chickamauga
and Chattanooga, by Jesse Littleton Rogers

